README.rst, before:

patatt: cryptographic patch attestation for the masses
======================================================

This utility allows an easy way to add end-to-end cryptographic
attestation to patches sent via mail. It does so by adapting the DKIM
email signature standard to include cryptographic signatures via the
X-Developer-Signature email header.

If your project workflow doesn't use patches sent via email, then you
don't need this and should simply start signing your tags and commits.

Basic concepts
--------------
DKIM is a widely adopted standard for domain-level attestation of email
messages. It works by hashing the message body and certain individual
headers, and then creating a cryptographic signature of the resulting
hash. The receiving side obtains the public key of the sending domain
from its DNS record and checks the signature and header/body hashes. If
the signature verifies and the resulting hashes are identical, then
there is a high degree of assurance that neither the body of the message
nor any of the signed headers were modified in transit.

This utility uses the exact same DKIM standard to hash the headers and
the body of the patch message, but uses a different set of fields and
canonicalization routines:

- the d= field is not used (no domain signatures involved)
- the q= field is not used (key lookup is left to the client)
- the c= field is not used (see below for canonicalization)
- the i= field is optional, but MUST be the canonical email address of
  the sender, if not the same as the From: field

Canonicalization
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Patatt uses the "relaxed/simple" canonicalization as defined by the DKIM
standard, but the message is first parsed by the "git-mailinfo" command
in order to achieve the following:

- normalize any content-transfer-encoding modifications (convert back
  from base64/quoted-printable/etc into 8-bit)
- use any encountered in-body From: and Subject: headers to
  rewrite the outer message headers
- perform the subject-line normalization in order to strip content not
  considered by git-am when applying the patch (i.e. drop [PATCH .*] and
  other bracketed prefix content)

To achieve this, the message is passed through git-mailinfo with the
following flags::

    cat orig.msg | git mailinfo --encoding=utf-8 m p > i

Patatt then uses the data found in "i" to replace the From: and Subject:
headers of the original message, and concatenates "m" and "p" back
together to form the body of the message, which is then normalized using
CRLF line endings and the DKIM "simple" body canonicalization (any
trailing blank lines are removed).

Any other headers included in signing are modified using the "relaxed"
header canonicalization routines as defined in the DKIM standard.

In other words, the body and some of the headers are normalized and
reconstituted using the "git-mailinfo" command, and then canonicalized
using DKIM's relaxed/simple standard.

Supported Signature Algorithms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
DKIM standard mostly relies on RSA signatures, though RFC 8463 extends
it to support ED25519 keys as well. While it is possible to use any of
the DKIM-defined algorithms, patatt only supports the following
two signing/hashing schemes:

- ed25519-sha256: exactly as defined in RFC8463
- openpgp-sha256: uses OpenPGP to create the signature

Note: Since GnuPG supports multiple signing key algorithms,
openpgp-sha256 signatures can be done using EDDSA keys as well. However,
since OpenPGP output includes additional headers, the "ed25519-sha256"
and "openpgp-sha256" schemes are not interchangeable even when EDDSA
keys are used in both cases.

In the future, patatt may add support for more algorithms, especially if
that allows incorporating TPM and U2F devices (e.g. for offloading
credential storage and crypto operations into a sandboxed environment).

X-Developer-Key header
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Patatt adds a separate ``X-Developer-Key:`` header with public key
information. It is merely informational and ISN'T and SHOULDN'T be used
for performing any kind of message validation (for obvious reasons). It
is included to make it easier for maintainers to obtain the
contributor's public key for performing whatever necessary
verification steps prior to including it into their individual or
project-wide keyrings.

This also allows keeping a historical record of contributor keys via
list archive services such as lore.kernel.org and others.

Getting started as contributor
------------------------------
It is very easy to start signing your patches with patatt.

Installing
~~~~~~~~~~
You can install from pip::

    pip install --user patatt

Make sure your PATH includes $HOME/.local/bin.

Alternatively, you can clone this repository and symlink patatt.sh into
your path::

    cd bin
    ln -s ~/path/to/patatt/patatt.sh patatt

After this, you should be able to run ``patatt --help`` without
specifying the full path to the repository.

Using PGP
~~~~~~~~~
If you already have a PGP key, you can simply start using it to sign
patches. Add the following to your ~/.gitconfig::

    [patatt]
        signingkey = openpgp:KEYID

The KEYID should be the 16-character identifier of your key, for
example::

    [patatt]
        signingkey = openpgp:E63EDCA9329DD07E

Using ed25519
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
If you don't already have a PGP key, you can opt to generate and use a
new ed25519 key instead (see below for some considerations on pros and
cons of PGP vs ed25519 keys).

To generate a new keypair, run::

    patatt genkey

You will see an output similar to the following::

    Generating a new ed25519 keypair
    Wrote: /home/user/.local/share/patatt/private/20210505.key
    Wrote: /home/user/.local/share/patatt/public/20210505.pub
    Wrote: /home/user/.local/share/patatt/public/ed25519/example.org/user/default
    Add the following to your .git/config (or global ~/.gitconfig):
    ---
    [patatt]
        signingkey = ed25519:20210505
    ---
    Next, communicate the contents of the following file to the
    repository keyring maintainers for inclusion into the project:
    /home/user/.local/share/patatt/public/20210505.pub

Please make sure to back up your new private key, located in
``~/.local/share/patatt/private``. It is short enough to simply print
out.

Next, just do as instructions say. If the project for which you are
contributing patches already uses patatt attestation, please work with
the project maintainers to add your public key to the repository. If
they aren't yet using patatt, just start signing your patches and
hopefully the project will start keeping its own keyring in the future.

Testing if it's working
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
To test if it's working::

    $ git format-patch -1 --stdout | patatt sign > /tmp/test

If you didn't get an error message, then the process was successful. You
can review /tmp/test to see that ``X-Developer-Signature`` and
``X-Developer-Key`` headers were successfully added.

You can now validate your own message::

    $ patatt validate /tmp/test

Automatic signing via the sendemail-validate hook
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
If everything is working well, you can start automatically signing all
outgoing patches sent via git-send-email::

    $ echo 'patatt sign --hook "${1}"' > .git/hooks/sendemail-validate
    $ chmod a+x .git/hooks/sendemail-validate

PGP vs ed25519 keys considerations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
If you don't already have a PGP key, you may wonder whether it makes
sense to create a new PGP key or start using standalone ed25519 keys.

Reasons to choose PGP:

- you can protect the PGP private key with a passphrase (gpg-agent will
  manage it for you so you only need to enter it once per session)
- you can move your PGP key to an OpenPGP-compliant smartcard to further
  protect your key from being leaked/stolen
- you can use PGP keys to sign git tags/commits, not just mailed patches

If you choose to create a new PGP key, you can follow the following
guide:
https://github.com/lfit/itpol/blob/master/protecting-code-integrity.md

Reasons to choose a standalone ed25519 key:

- much smaller signatures, especially compared to PGP RSA keys
- implements the DKIM ed25519 signing standard
- faster crypto

If you choose ed25519 keys, you will need to make sure that PyNaCl is
installed (pip install should have already taken care of it for you).

Getting started as a project maintainer
---------------------------------------
Patatt implements basic signature validation, but it's a tool aimed
primarily at contributors. If you are processing mailed-in patches, then
you should look into using b4, which aims at making the entire process
easier. B4 implements patatt-style signature validation starting with
version 0.7.0.

- https://pypi.org/project/b4/

That said, keyring management as discussed below applies both to patatt
and b4, so you can read on for an overview.

In-git pubkey management
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
The trickiest part of all decentralized PKI schemes is not the crypto
itself, but public key distribution and management. PGP famously tried
to solve this problem by relying on cross-key certification and
keyservers, but the results were not encouraging.

On the other hand, within the context of git repositories, we already
have a suitable mechanism for distributing developer public keys, which
is the repository itself. Consider this:

- git is already decentralized and can be mirrored to multiple
  locations, avoiding any single points of failure
- all contents are already versioned and key additions/removals can be
  audited and "git blame'd"
- git commits themselves can be cryptographically signed, which allows a
  small subset of developers to act as "trusted introducers" to many
  other contributors (mimicking the "keysigning" process)

The idea of using git itself for keyring management was originally
suggested by the did:git project, though we do not currently implement
the proposed standard itself.

- https://github.com/dhuseby/did-git-spec/blob/master/did-git-spec.md

Keyring structure
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
The keyring is structured as follows::

    - dir: topdir (e.g. ".keys")
      |
      - dir: keytype (e.g. "ed25519" or "openpgp")
        |
        - dir: domainname (e.g. "example.org")
          |
          - dir: address-localpart (e.g. "developer")
            |
            - file: selector (e.g. "default")

The main principle behind this structure was to make it easy to make key
management by multiple project maintainers without causing any
unnecessary git merge complications. Keeping all public keys in
individual files should achieve this goal.

For example, let's take the following signature::

    From: Konstantin Ryabitsev <konstantin@linuxfoundation.org>
    X-Developer-Signature: v=1; a=ed25519-sha256; t=1620240207; l=2577;
     h=from:subject; bh=yqviDBgyf3/dQgHcBe3B7fTP39SuKnYInPBxnOiuGcA=;
     b=Xzd0287MvPE9NLX7xbQ6xnyrvqQOMK01mxHnrPmm1f6O7KKyogc8YH6IAlwIPdo+jk1CkdYYQsyZ
     sS0cJdX2B4uTmV9mxOe7hssjtjLcj5/NU9zAw6WJARybaNAKH8rv

The key would be found in the following subpath::

    .keys/ed25519/linuxfoundation.org/konstantin/default

If i= and s= fields are specified in the signature, as below::

    X-Developer-Signature: v=1; a=ed25519-sha256; t=1620244687; l=12645;
     i=mricon@kernel.org; s=20210505; h=from:subject;
     bh=KRCBcYiMdeoSX0l1XJ2YzP/uJhmym3Pi6CmbN9fs4aM=;
     b=sSY2vXzju7zU3KK4VQ5vFa5iPpDr3nrf221lnpq2+uuXmCODlAsgoqDmjKUBmbPtlY1Bcb2N0XZQ
     0KX+OShCAAwB5U1dtFtRnB/mgVibMxwl68A7OivGIVYe491yll5q

Then the path would reflect those parameters::

    .keys/ed25519/kernel.org/mricon/20210505

In the case of ed25519 keys, the contents of the file are just the
base64-encoded public key itself. For openpgp keys, the format should be
the ascii-armored public key export, for example obtained by using the
following command::

    gpg -a --export --export-options export-minimal keyid

Whose keys to add to the keyring
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
It does not really make sense to require cryptographic attestation for
patches submitted by occasional contributors. The only keys added to the
keyring should be those of the core maintainers who have push access to
the "canonical" repository location, plus the keys belonging to regular
contributors with a long-term ongoing relationship with the project.

Managing the keyring: small teams
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
For smaller repositories with a handful of core maintainers, it makes
sense to keep the keyring in the main branch, together with all other
project files.

Managing the keyring: large teams
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
For large teams with thousands of regular contributors and teams of
subsystem maintainers (e.g. the Linux kernel), it does not make sense to
have a centrally managed keyring tracked in the main repository.
Instead, each subsystem maintainer team should manage their own keyring
in a separate ref of their own repository.

For example, to create a blank new ref called ``refs/meta/keyring``::

    git symbolic-ref HEAD refs/meta/keyring
    git reset --hard
    mkdir ed25519 openpgp

Individual public key files can then be added and committed following
the same structure as described above. Keeping the keyring outside the
regular development branch ensures that it doesn't interfere with
submitted pull requests or git-format-patch operations. Keeping the ref
under ``refs/meta/`` will hide it from most GUI interfaces, but if that
is not the goal, then it can be stored in ``refs/heads`` just like any
other branch.

To commit and push the files after adding them, regular git operations
should be used::

    git commit -asS
    git push origin HEAD:refs/meta/keyring
    # Switch back to the development environment
    git checkout regular-branch

To make changes to an existing keyring ref, a similar workflow can be
used::

    git fetch origin refs/meta/keyring
    git checkout FETCH_HEAD
    # Verify that the commit is signed
    git verify-commit FETCH_HEAD
    # make any changes to the keys
    git commit -asS
    git push origin HEAD:refs/meta/keyring
    git checkout regular-branch

Alternatively, if key additions/updates are frequent enough, the remote
ref can be checked out into its own workdir and set up for proper
remote tracking.

Telling patatt where to find the keyring(s)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
To use the keyring with patatt or b4, just tell them which paths to
check, via the ``keyringsrc`` setting (can be specified multiple
times and will be checked in the listed order)::

    [patatt]
        # Empty ref means "use currently checked out ref"
        keyringsrc = ref::.keys
        # Use a dedicated ref called refs/meta/keyring
        keyringsrc = ref:refs/meta/keyring:
        # You can fetch other project's keyring into its own ref
        keyringsrc = ref:refs/meta/someone-elses-keyring:
        # Use a regular dir on disk
        keyringsrc = ~/git/pgpkeys/keyring

For b4, use the same configuration under the ``[b4]`` section.

External and local-only keyrings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Any path on disk can be used for a keyring location, and some will
always be checked just in case. The following locations are added by
default::

    ref::.keys
    ref::.local-keys
    ref:refs/meta/keyring:
    $XDG_DATA_HOME/patatt/public

The "::" means "whatever ref is currently checked out", and
$XDG_DATA_HOME usually points at ~/.local/share.

Getting support and contributing patches
----------------------------------------
Please send patches and support requests to tools@linux.kernel.org.

Submissions must be made under the terms of the Linux Foundation
certificate of contribution and should include a Signed-off-by: line.
Please read the DCO file for full legal definition of what that implies.

Commit message:

Support other git dirs as sources
We need to have a way to specify other git dirs as sources, so change
how our ref: locations work. Instead of:

ref:[refname]:[subpath]

we now have:

ref:[repopath]:[refname]:[subpath]

Additionally, add a way to deal with one level of symlinks.

Signed-off-by: Konstantin Ryabitsev <konstantin@linuxfoundation.org>

README.rst, after:

patatt: cryptographic patch attestation for the masses
======================================================

This utility allows an easy way to add end-to-end cryptographic
attestation to patches sent via mail. It does so by adapting the DKIM
email signature standard to include cryptographic signatures via the
X-Developer-Signature email header.

If your project workflow doesn't use patches sent via email, then you
don't need this and should simply start signing your tags and commits.

Basic concepts
--------------
DKIM is a widely adopted standard for domain-level attestation of email
messages. It works by hashing the message body and certain individual
headers, and then creating a cryptographic signature of the resulting
hash. The receiving side obtains the public key of the sending domain
from its DNS record and checks the signature and header/body hashes. If
the signature verifies and the resulting hashes are identical, then
there is a high degree of assurance that neither the body of the message
nor any of the signed headers were modified in transit.

This utility uses the exact same DKIM standard to hash the headers and
the body of the patch message, but uses a different set of fields and
canonicalization routines:

- the d= field is not used (no domain signatures involved)
- the q= field is not used (key lookup is left to the client)
- the c= field is not used (see below for canonicalization)
- the i= field is optional, but MUST be the canonical email address of
  the sender, if not the same as the From: field

Canonicalization
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Patatt uses the "relaxed/simple" canonicalization as defined by the DKIM
standard, but the message is first parsed by the "git-mailinfo" command
in order to achieve the following:

- normalize any content-transfer-encoding modifications (convert back
  from base64/quoted-printable/etc into 8-bit)
- use any encountered in-body From: and Subject: headers to
  rewrite the outer message headers
- perform the subject-line normalization in order to strip content not
  considered by git-am when applying the patch (i.e. drop [PATCH .*] and
  other bracketed prefix content)

To achieve this, the message is passed through git-mailinfo with the
following flags::

    cat orig.msg | git mailinfo --encoding=utf-8 m p > i

Patatt then uses the data found in "i" to replace the From: and Subject:
headers of the original message, and concatenates "m" and "p" back
together to form the body of the message, which is then normalized using
CRLF line endings and the DKIM "simple" body canonicalization (any
trailing blank lines are removed).

Any other headers included in signing are modified using the "relaxed"
header canonicalization routines as defined in the DKIM standard.

In other words, the body and some of the headers are normalized and
reconstituted using the "git-mailinfo" command, and then canonicalized
using DKIM's relaxed/simple standard.

Supported Signature Algorithms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
DKIM standard mostly relies on RSA signatures, though RFC 8463 extends
it to support ED25519 keys as well. While it is possible to use any of
the DKIM-defined algorithms, patatt only supports the following
two signing/hashing schemes:

- ed25519-sha256: exactly as defined in RFC8463
- openpgp-sha256: uses OpenPGP to create the signature

Note: Since GnuPG supports multiple signing key algorithms,
openpgp-sha256 signatures can be done using EDDSA keys as well. However,
since OpenPGP output includes additional headers, the "ed25519-sha256"
and "openpgp-sha256" schemes are not interchangeable even when EDDSA
keys are used in both cases.

In the future, patatt may add support for more algorithms, especially if
that allows incorporating TPM and U2F devices (e.g. for offloading
credential storage and crypto operations into a sandboxed environment).

X-Developer-Key header
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Patatt adds a separate ``X-Developer-Key:`` header with public key
information. It is merely informational and ISN'T and SHOULDN'T be used
for performing any kind of message validation (for obvious reasons). It
is included to make it easier for maintainers to obtain the
contributor's public key for performing whatever necessary
verification steps prior to including it into their individual or
project-wide keyrings.

This also allows keeping a historical record of contributor keys via
list archive services such as lore.kernel.org and others.

Getting started as contributor
------------------------------
It is very easy to start signing your patches with patatt.

Installing
~~~~~~~~~~
You can install from pip::

    pip install --user patatt

Make sure your PATH includes $HOME/.local/bin.

Alternatively, you can clone this repository and symlink patatt.sh into
your path::

    cd bin
    ln -s ~/path/to/patatt/patatt.sh patatt

After this, you should be able to run ``patatt --help`` without
specifying the full path to the repository.

Using PGP
~~~~~~~~~
If you already have a PGP key, you can simply start using it to sign
patches. Add the following to your ~/.gitconfig::

    [patatt]
        signingkey = openpgp:KEYID

The KEYID should be the 16-character identifier of your key, for
example::

    [patatt]
        signingkey = openpgp:E63EDCA9329DD07E

Using ed25519
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
If you don't already have a PGP key, you can opt to generate and use a
new ed25519 key instead (see below for some considerations on pros and
cons of PGP vs ed25519 keys).

To generate a new keypair, run::

    patatt genkey

You will see an output similar to the following::

    Generating a new ed25519 keypair
    Wrote: /home/user/.local/share/patatt/private/20210505.key
    Wrote: /home/user/.local/share/patatt/public/20210505.pub
    Wrote: /home/user/.local/share/patatt/public/ed25519/example.org/user/default
    Add the following to your .git/config (or global ~/.gitconfig):
    ---
    [patatt]
        signingkey = ed25519:20210505
    ---
    Next, communicate the contents of the following file to the
    repository keyring maintainers for inclusion into the project:
    /home/user/.local/share/patatt/public/20210505.pub

Please make sure to back up your new private key, located in
``~/.local/share/patatt/private``. It is short enough to simply print
out.

Next, just do as instructions say. If the project for which you are
contributing patches already uses patatt attestation, please work with
the project maintainers to add your public key to the repository. If
they aren't yet using patatt, just start signing your patches and
hopefully the project will start keeping its own keyring in the future.

Testing if it's working
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
To test if it's working::

    $ git format-patch -1 --stdout | patatt sign > /tmp/test

If you didn't get an error message, then the process was successful. You
can review /tmp/test to see that ``X-Developer-Signature`` and
``X-Developer-Key`` headers were successfully added.

You can now validate your own message::

    $ patatt validate /tmp/test

Automatic signing via the sendemail-validate hook
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
If everything is working well, you can start automatically signing all
outgoing patches sent via git-send-email::

    $ echo 'patatt sign --hook "${1}"' > .git/hooks/sendemail-validate
    $ chmod a+x .git/hooks/sendemail-validate

PGP vs ed25519 keys considerations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
If you don't already have a PGP key, you may wonder whether it makes
sense to create a new PGP key or start using standalone ed25519 keys.

Reasons to choose PGP:

- you can protect the PGP private key with a passphrase (gpg-agent will
  manage it for you so you only need to enter it once per session)
- you can move your PGP key to an OpenPGP-compliant smartcard to further
  protect your key from being leaked/stolen
- you can use PGP keys to sign git tags/commits, not just mailed patches

If you choose to create a new PGP key, you can follow the following
guide:
https://github.com/lfit/itpol/blob/master/protecting-code-integrity.md

Reasons to choose a standalone ed25519 key:

- much smaller signatures, especially compared to PGP RSA keys
- implements the DKIM ed25519 signing standard
- faster crypto

If you choose ed25519 keys, you will need to make sure that PyNaCl is
installed (pip install should have already taken care of it for you).

Getting started as a project maintainer
---------------------------------------
Patatt implements basic signature validation, but it's a tool aimed
primarily at contributors. If you are processing mailed-in patches, then
you should look into using b4, which aims at making the entire process
easier. B4 implements patatt-style signature validation starting with
version 0.7.0.

- https://pypi.org/project/b4/

That said, keyring management as discussed below applies both to patatt
and b4, so you can read on for an overview.

In-git pubkey management
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
The trickiest part of all decentralized PKI schemes is not the crypto
itself, but public key distribution and management. PGP famously tried
to solve this problem by relying on cross-key certification and
keyservers, but the results were not encouraging.

On the other hand, within the context of git repositories, we already
have a suitable mechanism for distributing developer public keys, which
is the repository itself. Consider this:

- git is already decentralized and can be mirrored to multiple
  locations, avoiding any single points of failure
- all contents are already versioned and key additions/removals can be
  audited and "git blame'd"
- git commits themselves can be cryptographically signed, which allows a
  small subset of developers to act as "trusted introducers" to many
  other contributors (mimicking the "keysigning" process)

The idea of using git itself for keyring management was originally
suggested by the did:git project, though we do not currently implement
the proposed standard itself.

- https://github.com/dhuseby/did-git-spec/blob/master/did-git-spec.md

Keyring structure
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
The keyring is structured as follows::

    - dir: topdir (e.g. ".keys")
      |
      - dir: keytype (e.g. "ed25519" or "openpgp")
        |
        - dir: domainname (e.g. "example.org")
          |
          - dir: address-localpart (e.g. "developer")
            |
            - file: selector (e.g. "default")

The main principle behind this structure was to make it easy to make key
management by multiple project maintainers without causing any
unnecessary git merge complications. Keeping all public keys in
individual files should achieve this goal.

For example, let's take the following signature::

    From: Konstantin Ryabitsev <konstantin@linuxfoundation.org>
    X-Developer-Signature: v=1; a=ed25519-sha256; t=1620240207; l=2577;
     h=from:subject; bh=yqviDBgyf3/dQgHcBe3B7fTP39SuKnYInPBxnOiuGcA=;
     b=Xzd0287MvPE9NLX7xbQ6xnyrvqQOMK01mxHnrPmm1f6O7KKyogc8YH6IAlwIPdo+jk1CkdYYQsyZ
     sS0cJdX2B4uTmV9mxOe7hssjtjLcj5/NU9zAw6WJARybaNAKH8rv

The key would be found in the following subpath::

    .keys/ed25519/linuxfoundation.org/konstantin/default

If i= and s= fields are specified in the signature, as below::

    X-Developer-Signature: v=1; a=ed25519-sha256; t=1620244687; l=12645;
     i=mricon@kernel.org; s=20210505; h=from:subject;
     bh=KRCBcYiMdeoSX0l1XJ2YzP/uJhmym3Pi6CmbN9fs4aM=;
     b=sSY2vXzju7zU3KK4VQ5vFa5iPpDr3nrf221lnpq2+uuXmCODlAsgoqDmjKUBmbPtlY1Bcb2N0XZQ
     0KX+OShCAAwB5U1dtFtRnB/mgVibMxwl68A7OivGIVYe491yll5q

Then the path would reflect those parameters::

    .keys/ed25519/kernel.org/mricon/20210505

In the case of ed25519 keys, the contents of the file are just the
base64-encoded public key itself. For openpgp keys, the format should be
the ascii-armored public key export, for example obtained by using the
following command::

    gpg -a --export --export-options export-minimal keyid

Whose keys to add to the keyring
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
It does not really make sense to require cryptographic attestation for
patches submitted by occasional contributors. The only keys added to the
keyring should be those of the core maintainers who have push access to
the "canonical" repository location, plus the keys belonging to regular
contributors with a long-term ongoing relationship with the project.

Managing the keyring: small teams
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
For smaller repositories with a handful of core maintainers, it makes
sense to keep the keyring in the main branch, together with all other
project files.

Managing the keyring: large teams
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
For large teams with thousands of regular contributors and teams of
subsystem maintainers (e.g. the Linux kernel), it does not make sense to
have a centrally managed keyring tracked in the main repository.
Instead, each subsystem maintainer team should manage their own keyring
in a separate ref of their own repository.

For example, to create a blank new ref called ``refs/meta/keyring``::

    git symbolic-ref HEAD refs/meta/keyring
    git reset --hard
    mkdir ed25519 openpgp

Individual public key files can then be added and committed following
the same structure as described above. Keeping the keyring outside the
regular development branch ensures that it doesn't interfere with
submitted pull requests or git-format-patch operations. Keeping the ref
under ``refs/meta/`` will hide it from most GUI interfaces, but if that
is not the goal, then it can be stored in ``refs/heads`` just like any
other branch.

To commit and push the files after adding them, regular git operations
should be used::

    git commit -asS
    git push origin HEAD:refs/meta/keyring
    # Switch back to the development environment
    git checkout regular-branch

To make changes to an existing keyring ref, a similar workflow can be
used::

    git fetch origin refs/meta/keyring
    git checkout FETCH_HEAD
    # Verify that the commit is signed
    git verify-commit FETCH_HEAD
    # make any changes to the keys
    git commit -asS
    git push origin HEAD:refs/meta/keyring
    git checkout regular-branch

Alternatively, if key additions/updates are frequent enough, the remote
ref can be checked out into its own workdir and set up for proper
remote tracking.

Telling patatt where to find the keyring(s)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
To use the keyring with patatt or b4, just tell them which paths to
check, via the ``keyringsrc`` setting (can be specified multiple
times and will be checked in the listed order)::

    [patatt]
        # Empty ref means "use currently checked out ref in this repo"
        keyringsrc = ref:::.keys
        # Use a dedicated ref in this repo called refs/meta/keyring
        keyringsrc = ref::refs/meta/keyring:
        # Use a ref in a different repo
        keyringsrc = ref:~/path/to/another/repo:refs/heads/main:.keys
        # Use a regular dir on disk
        keyringsrc = ~/git/pgpkeys/keyring

For b4, use the same configuration under the ``[b4]`` section.

External and local-only keyrings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Any path on disk can be used for a keyring location, and some will
always be checked just in case. The following locations are added by
default::

    ref:::.keys
    ref:::.local-keys
    ref::refs/meta/keyring:
    $XDG_DATA_HOME/patatt/public

The ":::" means "whatever ref is checked out in the current repo",
and $XDG_DATA_HOME usually points at $HOME/.local/share.

Getting support and contributing patches
----------------------------------------
Please send patches and support requests to tools@linux.kernel.org.

Submissions must be made under the terms of the Linux Foundation
certificate of contribution and should include a Signed-off-by: line.
Please read the DCO file for full legal definition of what that implies.
